hello everyone I'm dr. John Torres in
New York and this as an NBC News now
special report coronavirus pandemic your
questions answered our daily way of life
has shifted dramatically as this virus
spreads across the country schools are
closed people are working from home
travel is being limited and there's also
this palpable sense of fear and concern
about what the next few weeks will bring
and so it's our goal throughout this
next hour to help you navigate this new
normal as best we can
by bringing you the most accurate
information and giving you tangible
advice you can take home and our medical
experts are here to help me do that
first off is dr. Natalie azar she's an
NBC News medical contributor and dr.
Joseph fair he's our NBC News science
contributor he's a virologist and an
epidemiologist so dr. a is our let's
start with you this is a big question we
get if you have respiratory symptoms and
if you have a dry cough what should be
your first move do you stay home do you
get tested what are you doing it's a
it's the case like this well look well
we'll cut to the chase and say any time
you would have shortness of breath or
trouble breathing you can certainly go
to an emergency room we don't want
people staying away from health care
systems when they have life-threatening
symptoms but a dry cough you're calling
your doctor first because look you could
see a dry cough and allergies and colds
in the flu as well as copán it's very
nonspecific and you know part of the
conversation that we're having right now
is how do you tell the difference
between all of these things so a dry
cough is definitely not an emergency
symptom difficulty breathing absolutely
something that can send you to the
emergency room and a lot of people with
that dry cough right now they're gonna
think coronavirus they're gonna think I
need to get tested do they need to get
tested at this point well look I mean I
think if you're asking from a public
health perspective the answer would be
yes the more the more we can really know
the background rate and the true
prevalence of this the better
in reality though number one that isn't
happening and really can't happen with
the capacity of our testing right now
and secondly would it really change the
management and the answer is no if you
are otherwise healthy without underlying
chronic medical conditions that would
increase your risk for having an adverse
outcome aka lung you know chronic lung
disease chronic heart disease kidney
disease immunocompromised that kind of
thing then knowing whether you do or
don't wouldnt change the management if
you are have mild symptoms you can be
managed at home in isolation monitoring
your symptoms with your doctor remotely
and speaking of those symptoms dr. aids
are a lot of people say I have a fever
or I didn't have a fever could I still
have coronavirus without that fever you
can one of the largest case series are
one of the most detailed that we have
from Wuhan in a hundred and thirty-eight
patients only forty four percent
actually had a fever so it's not
Universal and doctor fair people
nowadays are saying you go to the
grocery store you go to the pharmacies
you go anywhere you're not gonna find
disinfectants you're not gonna find
wipes bleach or spray how can they
disinfect things if they can't find
those products well there's a couple of
ways we can do it you know if you happen
to have a pool or a hot tub but chlorine
works just as well and there's CDC
guidelines on the CDC of CDC website
about how exactly to mix the chlorine
and what percentage but you know a lot
of people aren't even that I have
chlorine so the basic answer is this the
reason we recommend soap and water and
washing your hands so much is the
detergents in soap actually break down
the envelopes of the virus and
inactivate them so if it comes right
down to it and you don't have any of
those things use your basic sponge that
you've microwaved because sponges carry
a lot of viruses and microbes on them
anyway and use soap and water and just
wash it down with soap and water with a
nice rinse and that should take care of
it and when you microwave that sponge is
there any time limit should you do it
for a minute you do 30 seconds 30
seconds as I find is good I think but
beyond that you risk burning the sponge
but 30 seconds in evacuate activates
pretty much everything in a micro and
then burning your hand when you pick and
dr. a czar we know that a lot of people
are asymptomatic you know 80 percent
have mild to moderate symptoms a lot of
those are asymptomatic as well can the
virus run its course including you being
contagious without actually you knowing
you have the virus absolutely I mean you
can be exposed to the virus and develop
symptoms within you know 2 to 12 or up
to 14 days or Never and we know that
transmission does occur in both mildly
symptomatic and in asymptomatic
individuals so yes you could no you
could never know you had it and still
have passed it on to people which is
definitely frightening I get that and if
a person is put into isolation that's
different in quarantine it's they're put
into isolation because they had Kovac 19
when can they leave that isolation so
right now the recommendation if they are
a laboratory confirmed case and you're
able to get testing ideally or or by the
the formal recommendation is that you
have two consecutive tests and that's
again with a swab 24 hours apart or you
have to be seven days from symptom onset
or fever free for 72 hours then you're
considered no longer contagious and can
leave isolation excellent and doctors
are to stay with you for a little bit
here and let's get into how people are
living on a day to day basis because a
lot of people are worried about their
food so let's talk about that is it safe
to eat takeout or delivery because we're
getting a lot of advice to try and help
local restaurants by ordering food out
is that safe yeah right now there's no
restriction on that and no news or cause
or concerned that the food supply has
been affected in any way obviously for
hot foods
there's the guarantee hopefully that
you're heating things up to a degree
that could kill virus on fresh fruits
and vegetables we're recommending a
thorough cleaning as you would with any
produce as we know that foodborne
illness is very very common and to wash
your hands before eating but I think
this is especially important now that
for seniors in your community who you
know may be at a greater risk to go to
the grocery store and I know there's
grocery stores are staggering times now
and having times for just seniors to be
at the grocery store but that still
requires them to be out you know and
potentially in contact with other folks
so meal delivery and grocery delivery to
our senior citizens can be a great
public service right now X is still a
great idea so definitely you do that if
you can and doctor fair a lot of people
have children and rightly so they're
concerned about their children one of
the questions they ask is how long can
Kovac 19 the disease live on a car seat
you know and actually let me touch on
that last point as well you know it's
just kind of the same along the same
lines if you're getting a food delivery
and it's in a plastic case remember to
wash your hands after you've opened the
case and it's always safer to eat with a
fork and a knife and a time like this
rather than putting your fingers
directly in your mouth
as far as car seats go it really depends
on the material you know if it's going
to be a cotton or a cloth and it's more
porous it's going to last less than if
it's on I say a leather or synthetic
surface but you know it can last up to a
number of days the laboratory studies
have shown up to nine days for
coronaviruses in general we don't know
if this particular coronavirus can last
up to nine days but general
recommendation is when you get in that
car anything that's someone else is
going to have touch before you being
like the door handles when you're
getting in or getting out particularly
when you're getting out not when you're
getting in because there's sunlight on
those door handles getting in you're
going to want to keep a barrier between
you and those door handles so if you
have a tissue handy open it with a
tissue in your hand and that's a way to
keep yourself safe also be very mindful
of where you're putting your hands in
the car so if it's an uber for example
other people have been in there try not
to put your hands on the seat keep them
on your knees instead of putting them on
the seat and I imagine it's kind of like
an airplane you don't want to stick your
hand in that seat pocket in front of you
because no telling what people put in
absolutely doctor azar let's talk about
reinfection people have a lot of
questions about this as well what are
the rates of people catching this a
second time and if you do catch it twice
is it gonna be less severe yeah so
there's a lot of there's I think there
was a Chinese paper that came out about
this and said something in the in the in
the range of 14% but this this these are
just case reports this has not been
scientifically confirmed at all and in
fact the thought is that you know remote
re-infections certainly can have you
know you can get the flu one year and
your immunity wanes and you can get the
flu again the next year that the issue
is that perhaps in that a person tests
positive seems to recover has a test
which is negative and then gets sick
again
so
the idea maybe there is that maybe that
test wasn't really negative could it
have been a false negative and the
person never really cleared the
infection this is it this is the test in
between we're talking about the middle
test between exactly so the issue of a
false positive or a false negative that
can actually be obscuring or clouding
this because I think most of us would
think that if if someone's immune system
is robust they should be able to form
antibodies and develop immunity and we
would not expect reinfection right away
so again this is there are case reports
but this isn't something again these are
just you know cases individual cases as
opposed to a large study that really
confirms that people in fact can be
reinfected so not something people
typically have to worry about unless of
course there are immunocompromised
that's a different story
correct correct and dr. ferret again
focusing on children because I do get
this question all the time about
playdates you have your child in the
house they're out of school they want to
play with their friends how can they do
that safely or can they do that safely
well I think in general you know we're
wrecking them recommending if you can
avoid the playdates do so but you know
at the same time you've got to keep in
mind that children pick up on your
anxiety and we want them to have as
normal a life as they can and keep their
stress as low as you can so ideally if
you're working from home right now
because of Cova 19 it's a better time to
play with your kid and spend more time
with your kid because it's going to be
rare that you have a normal day where
you can do that but I I don't remember
if it was John or Natalie just because
we've talked about it so on so many
different shows but one of the more
innovative solutions that I think I
don't want to be brought up or a viewer
brought up was that they had an
agreement with the neighbor next door
that you know we our family is going to
stay in our immediate circle your family
is going to stay in your immediate
circle and then they were going to have
this the playdates together with our
kids and so that's a way to minimize the
risk it's not eliminating the risk but
it is absolutely minimizing it as long
as both families or the families that
agree to do that are all following the
same rules and doctor fair one of the
questions I get as well is air
conditioning units as far as does that
spread coronavirus or heaters do they
spread coronavirus is that something
people need to worry about you know
typically every air conditioner or
heater is going to have a filter in it
they're not exactly always going to be
HEPA filter or high-efficiency particle
filters but that being said we didn't
see that with SARS and this is the most
closely related virus we notice ours or
we don't really see that with you know
cold or flu so the science is still out
on it but I don't think that's a
valuable route for the before infection
with this virus and dr. azar the
government over the last couple days and
they're different briefings they've had
their hitting Millennials pretty hard
and they're saying Millennials are one
there's a solution to a lot of this
they're the ones who can really help get
it under control but also at the same
time they're a problem and they today
they talked about Italy and France
having issues with Millennials getting
sick at higher rates than they do in
China is that because Millennials aren't
necessarily paying attention to what
they're trying to tell them to do as far
as that social distancing yeah look I
mean I don't I don't think it's fair to
just generalize and say that it's you
know all of them of course but you know
that age you know perhaps top of mind
isn't necessarily their civic duty for
many of them and I think there's also a
component of you know unrealistic
optimism when you're young you you know
don't think that you're really ever
going to get sick or that bad things
aren't going to happen to you and we're
reinforcing that in the media by saying
that if you're young and otherwise
healthy without other underlying medical
conditions you're probably gonna be just
fine so it's almost like you can't blame
that behavior based on the messaging
that they're getting but you know never
forget that even though that's generally
true that this age group is going to do
fine with this virus there are going to
be exceptions and young people sadly
will you know die from this not to
mention the fact that they'll be passing
it to people who are less capable of
fighting it off so I think we just have
to be you know consistent and you know
honest in our messaging dr. Nedley is
our dr. Joseph fair thank you so much
for helping us here I think you cleared
up a lot of points that we have and
you've been wonderful thank you very
much so if you're feeling sick how do
you
actually get tested well NBC News now
Alexa Leo toe watches through the
step-by-step process and why some people
are hitting roadblocks even today so
you're feeling sick you have a fever
maybe you have a cough chances are
you're probably feeling anxious about
whether or not you have coronavirus so
how do you get tested after all
President Trump did tell reporters
earlier in March that quote anybody who
wants a test gets a test but what does
that actually look like in practice
let's break down the guidelines first if
you think you may have Kovan 19 or have
been in contact with anybody who is
tested positive for Kovan 19 the advice
is first to call your medical provider
to let them know you're coming in ahead
of time that's to make sure that you're
not infecting anybody upon your visit
second when you do go see a doctor a
prioritization process will still likely
exist considering the limited number of
tests in the United States your doctors
will try to determine how likely it is
that you might have the virus while also
assessing the risk of where you've been
and who you've been in contact with more
formally your clinical features and your
epidemiological risk doctors will ask
about your symptoms like whether you've
had a fever and a cough they may test
you for the flu and for strep they'll
also want to know if you've traveled to
any hotspots for the virus in the last
two weeks or if you've had any close
contact with someone who's tested
positive for the virus third if your
healthcare provider does determine that
you are at risk of the virus the order
of tests for you that test is in nasal
swab to the back of the nose or the
throat so how long do you wait for the
results of that test well it depends if
it comes from a state lab or a
commercial lab for example we know that
in Florida the state labs take 24 to 48
hours but the commercial labs it's about
3 to 4 days for instance in New York
which has one of the largest clusters of
coronavirus cases in the US Governor
Andrew Cuomo wants the state to be
testing a thousand people a day but
here's the thing while in theory the
government says that tests should be
available in practice things look a
little different you need to be tested
and told me to call my phone number
called that number and after just tried
to get a patient tested an hour ago and
I couldn't in my outpatient office many
of these individuals say they aren't
able to get a test because they don't
quite meet the state's criteria so maybe
they haven't visited an epicenter of the
outbreak or maybe they haven't been in
contact with someone who's tested
positive for coronavirus so what happens
if you don't meet the state's criteria
but still want to get tested well
commercial labs are starting to roll out
thousands of more tests some are even
opening up facilities in various states
the American Clinical Laboratory
Association said in a press release
quote assuming there are no delays or
shortages of necessary materials and
supplies commercial capacity is expected
to exceed 280,000 tests per week by
April 1st
LabCorp for its part expects quote the
ability to perform more than 10,000
tests per day by the end of the week and
20,000 tests per day by the end of the
month
LabCorp also notes that any physician or
quote authorized healthcare provider can
order these tests anywhere in the United
States so while that does mean more
tests are going to be available you'll
still need doctor's approval other
states like Washington are getting help
from private charities as well like the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
that's hoping to offer at-home testing
for the Seattle area these drive-through
testing sites are going to be crucial to
try to slow the spread of the virus and
we're out one of the first ones that
Dallas has seen doctors here making
plans weeks ago and while there have
been significant delays confusion and
shortages the testing situation in the
United States should be getting better
President Trump on Friday did declare a
national emergency that would free up
about fifty billion dollars in aid for
states to expand their treatment and
specifically implement drive-through
testing on Saturday the House of
Representatives passed legislation that
expands free testing as well and helps
with paid sick leave as House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi said in a letter to her
colleagues quote this legislation is
about testing testing
testing so we've talked about your
physical health now we're going to talk
about your financial health and you've
probably been avoid looking at your 401k
coming up we'll talk to some experts to
help you navigate this new normal
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
left good afternoon from this news meet
for your streaming world NBC news now
[Music]
we're here for them we are the community
it's definitely good to hear you always
want to hear that the wages are going up
we work hard we believe we sweat we cry
when it comes to these cars without this
pill we die he's doing the best he can
for the country they're getting in the
way we're gonna build the wall we have
no jobs this has an emergency there are
zero hours left to take action because
very costly does mean that you should
lose our right to vote this is the
perfect time to graduate it's like a lot
of shooting
these are thoughtful voters who more
than anything when these candidates to
cut to the chase NBC Nightly News with
Lester Holt covering coronavirus with
facts over fear how do we know who
belongs in isolation what should we be
conscious out being worked on today at a
time of national crisis turned to the
most trusted TV news anchor in America
need your true crime fix on the go
Dateline episodes are available as
podcasts mysteries with a twist from the
true crime original Wow listen to
Dateline wherever you get your podcasts
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
laughing brought more to the caucuses
news meet for your streaming world live
weekdays 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern
[Music]
good evening from Las Vegas and Chester
Washington why should your judgment be
valued let's take my judgment against
anyone out there it's party unity your
concern right now or is simply winning
as many states as well it's both NBC
Nightly News with Lester Holt if it's
digging in on the issues let's talk
about money in politics if it's asking
the questions you want asked how do you
reassure those supporters that you will
sustain this just watch me if it's
navigating the winding road to the White
House and if it's Sunday it's Meet the
Press
the corona virus outbreak what's next
NBC News has in-depth coverage answers
to your questions insight from medical
experts and up-to-the-minute live blog
updates for continuing coverage turn to
the networks and platforms of NBC News
as the corona virus pandemic brings life
across the country to a grinding halt
Americans are facing a new normal one
that may include losing their jobs
losing their income and even losing
their health insurance to help us
navigate this let's bring an NBC News
senior business correspondent Stephanie
ruhle an NBC News investigative and
consumer correspondent Vicki Wynn Steph
let's start with you people have either
lost their income as a result of a
pandemic or on the verge of losing their
income what can they do file for
unemployment I know that we are watching
the news every day and we get different
messages and it sounds like people might
be getting an actual check from the
government but we also know that
unemployment benefits more and more
people are asking for them certain
states are seeing more people apply for
unemployment in a day then they see
normally over weeks so people need to go
on their state's website make sure
you're going gov not calm because you
don't want to end up on a scam site and
immediately apply the government is
actually fast tracked people to receive
it because normally there's a decent
amount of lag time but right now the
government knows this is like a natural
disaster the president has said he
considers himself a wartime president
and that money people need it especially
if they're being asked to stay at home
to take care of their kids and they
don't have any income so apply for that
unemployment and hopefully it'll get
there soon and stuff I know a lot of
business owners I was a small business
owner
one point you think okay I just bring
them back to part time I'm helping them
out a lot is that the best thing to do
not right now because what we're being
told from a medical perspective and you
know this better than I do it's simply
to shut down for a period of time and I
know it's hard because when you run a
small business it's like a family you're
a team but the sooner you can say let's
put these employees in a position or
maybe they can be getting government
support leave in that direction then you
know what when things are back up and
running when we're out from under this
cloud then you can bring those employees
back hopefully they'll be available I
hope so and I hope it's not as long as
it looks like it might be but Vicky's
spring break is coming up and a lot of
folks are gonna go vacationing and
they're gonna stay in Airbnb ease what
should they do well if that trip is
within the next 15 days I hate to be the
bearer of bad news but on Monday
president Trump made it very clear he
wants all Americans to stay home and
that means staying home from spring
break I don't want to tell you and it's
not fun but this is an extraordinary
time where we have to accept a new
normal and take extraordinary steps now
if your trip is beyond that 15-day
window things are certainly still in
flux the CDC has certain guidelines and
questions that you should be asking are
you headed to an area where corona virus
is spreading are you travelling in close
contact with other people are you
yourself healthy will you have a plan
for what to do if you get sick and then
when you come back who are you coming
into contact with those are all
questions that the CDC is asking people
to consider before they take any sort of
non-discretionary trips also can you
take any time off when you return what
if you do get sick what's the plan there
the idea now is as you know we need to
slow the spread of this virus so the
sooner that we can do that the sooner
things can return to normal if you have
plans for an air B&B right now air B&B
has just announced that they have
extended their policies for extenuating
circumstances so they are allowing
people to cancel without penalty so if
you're considering a spring break trip
you want to cancel you're worried about
losing your money on an air B&B you can
get it back and something you brought up
brought to mind if you do go to a place
that turns into a hot spot especially if
you were around somebody that has kovat
19a disease you might end up getting
quarantined for 14 days back here you
may not be able to go to war work so
same thing you said you need
ready for that exactly you've got to
build that time and is it worth the risk
right now and Steph Ford GM Chrysler
they all announced today that they're
temporarily closing factories because of
this virus what does that mean for their
workers you know that depends on which
of the big three you know that before we
heard this about the auto companies some
of the biggest companies out there
who've had to layoff or temporarily
closed down because they're not
necessarily laying off workers they're
just closing down so when we've seen
that happen in stores for example like
the Apple Store they were willing to pay
those part-time employees during this
time now in the auto industries case
those are full-time employees so we
don't know the details to that yet but
what those what those auto workers
should do is talk to their own HR
department and see what they're gonna do
what their company's trying to do with
them and remember what you just said you
you at one point you were a small
business owner these big big companies
are in a very different situation they
have a lot more slack and cushion or at
least they should to support their
employees during a stress time like this
it's one of the reasons a lot of people
are seeing pushback against the idea of
a bailout for the auto industry because
I want to remind people that ninety six
percent of what's known as the free cash
flow the money that Airlines had on hand
over the last few years they didn't save
as a rainy day cushion they used it to
buy back shares you know who that serves
shareholders not the employees not their
end-user customers so at a time like
this is when companies want to have a
cushion so it's time to take care of
that employee right now they obviously
need it especially what's going on over
the next couple of weeks in couple
months but Vicky one of the other thing
that's going on out there are a lot of
consumer scams that are circulating
around what should people be on the
lookout for anything coming to their
email box or that's being shared on this
or their social media that's too good to
be true
some key scams to be looking for
phishing emails these are the emails
that look like they're coming from an
official source maybe they look like
they're coming from the World Health
Organization or the CDC with some
information about the corona virus that
you haven't heard and they're urging you
to click on a link or download an
attachment never ever do that not only
could that be putting your personal
information at risk that could also put
you at risk for ransomware where bad
software is being downloaded onto your
computer and then freezing all of your
files so be on the lookout for those
things also those emails that seem like
they're from people that you know
telling you something that seems too
good to be true that you haven't heard
like holding your breath for 10 seconds
and if you can do that that means you
don't have the coronavirus or drinking
water every 15 minutes is going to help
you avoid the virus these are things
that for whatever reason are going
around scammers are using them to try to
fish look for data patterns
don't fall for these things always go to
a trusted reputable news source and if
you are looking for information go to
that website go to the CDC's website or
the World Health Organization or
nbcnews.com go there directly never
click on links from emails that you are
not expecting the other scams that are
going around have to do with cures we're
seeing now fake testing kits that are
being circulated that are being sold
direct-to-consumer on online
marketplaces you cannot get a corona
virus test direct-to-consumer these are
only being administered through public
health departments so if someone wants
you to pay them money for a test that
promises your results for the corona
virus don't fall for that scam and there
is no cure for corona virus bottom line
so don't fall for that anyway shape or
form and Stephanie April 15th is around
the corner just a few weeks away or tax
is still going to be due that day taxes
are due that day we know that this has
been a very stressed time for a lot of
people so you might want to apply for an
extension but remember even if you plot
apply for an extension that still means
you need to guesstimate how much you owe
and send that money in you don't want to
put yourself delayed because that's when
you can suddenly be incurring late fees
and penalties Vicki right now people are
worried about jobs there are still some
folks hiring out there right who are
they yeah earlier in your show you
talked about Amazon but all the grocery
chains big ones
Albertsons Safeway Kroger not only
hiring but they're opening up new
positions
Kroger's hired 2,000 people they have
10,000 more openings here's one you
might not be thinking about as you're
staying home for these 15 days maybe
you're looking over your resume
considering what what happens on the
other side of this IXL is an online
learning company a lot of those
companies now are opening new positions
for educators and people who can help in
that space
because there's a lot of stay at home
school happening right now and that's
going to be happening for the
foreseeable future
so check into those online companies as
well as grocery stores if you want to
get back to work right now
and Stephanie somewhat I need to correct
something I made a mistake they have
actually delayed April 15th Americans
now have an extra 90 days to pay but
remember if you are ready to file the
sooner you file if you think you're
getting a refund the sooner you get it
back and if you file online rather than
on paper you're gonna get it even sooner
and you can still file an extension if
you need to correct absolutely now stick
with you for a little while longer if
things keep going on it looks like we're
in this for the long haul how quickly
could we expect that labor market to
start returning to normal to turn around
listen this is really really complicated
and we've got different numbers
different estimates every day it was
just a couple days ago Treasury
secretary Steve minuchin said he didn't
expect a recession at all and now across
the board more and more people including
the president are saying we're facing a
recession a global recession something
to think about though we've heard a lot
about this V the president has said it
some economists have said it coronavirus
is causing the economy the markets to go
like this and as soon as we come out the
other side then the numbers go down it's
gonna shoot right back up like that like
a V but people should be more prepared
for the idea of a U and here's why
people change their behavior if we are
suddenly in lockdown and we're changing
our behavior over a couple of months
when we come out the other side we might
not be interested in exactly the same
things and think about it from a
business perspective it's suddenly
companies realize they don't need to be
spending that much on corporate travel
or events or conferences telecom for
telework might work a whole lot better
you're going to see companies change
corporate behavior and for the hotel for
the travel industry that's their biggest
ticket clients Corporate America you
could see that change you could even see
your personal behavior change you might
go to the movies every week once you
discover that you got Netflix or you
like you like playing board games or
puzzles you might not go back to that
movie theater so consumer companies are
starting to prepare for these changes
retailers especially Stephanie and
Vickie thank you so much for helping you
get through this maze of our financial
health which is important for just about
everybody so thank you very much for
helping us out here to be here and from
Amazon to your local grocer US
businesses are changing strategies to
handle increased demand during the
corona virus pandemic business and
technology correspondent Jolene Kent
joins us now from Los Angeles Joe we're
certainly practicing the social
distancing how are you doing doing well
now Amazon we talk about they're hiding
a hundred thousand workers amid the
crisis here problem is they're gonna be
in warehouses what can workers do to
avoid getting infected inside those
warehouses yeah that's a great question
so amazon wants to hire a hundred
thousand workers inside warehouses and
also delivery drivers and as you can
imagine there's a lot that goes into
delivery that could put a person at risk
so what amazon is telling me is they're
trying to practice that public health
that hygiene that that social distancing
we were just talking about making sure
they're sanitizing their warehouses but
beyond that they're also trying to focus
on what customers really need as they
try to staff up and meet this big demand
for all the household products you're
looking for the baby products the stuff
to keep your home clean and your car
clean and so what they're doing is they
are no longer accepting certain
third-party sellers items the new stuff
that would normally come into their
warehouse instead they're focusing on
just those products but it's a really
big problem in Amazon continues to say
the same thing we're just trying to keep
things clean and sanitized and efficient
so that we can keep on moving ahead but
we did ask them you know in case say the
state of California goes into a shelter
and play situation like they have in San
Francisco isn't Amazon warehouse
essential in the way that a grocery
store is essential and they have not
answered us on that front yet and you
bring up a good point about the delivery
workers because they're getting in and
out of trucks they're touching a lot of
doorknobs or interacting with strangers
when they hand the package over what can
they do specifically to avoid getting
covert 19 well the good news is on the
consumer side there are ways to elect
for contact free delivery and so there's
ways for you you can elect to have your
package through a bunch of different
delivery services left on your doorstep
or left outside of
you can elect these different options in
different ways not just the reales on
but other delivery programs but there's
certainly a lot of concern around this
and we've been talking to you a few
retail e-commerce Giants beyond just
Amazon and they're trying to provide
everything that they can when it comes
to the sanitizing wipe and the hand
sanitizer to keep everyone feeling safe
and practicing safe hygiene and you know
the new normal over the last few days
maybe in the last week or so are a lot
of empty store shelves is there a real
risk of a food supply shortage or people
just hoarding is it wise for them to
hoard well what we're seeing right now
is everyone's panic buying right you're
going to the store you're seeing the
long lines there's no sliced bread
there's no milk there's no toilet paper
but the good news is that we see this
surgeon buying but all of the major
grocery store chains are telling us
there's plenty of food the real issue is
the supply chain and logistics so when
people see panic buying they panic buy
that creates a double whammy effect then
the store shelves are empty so a lot of
these grocery stores are having to cut
back their hours say closing a little
earlier open opening a little later in
the morning so they can deploy their
staff to restock the shelves of course
there's the fact there's delivery from
the warehouses there's that aspect of it
and I know Vickie mentioned earlier a
lot of these grocery stores are hiring
up and they're hiring on this spot in
some cases just to get enough people
there to handle this urgent demand
in fact I was just talking to a cashier
last week before this got super super
intense here in LA and she said that it
was Wednesday night right after
President Trump spoke and she told me
this is bigger than Thanksgiving and
Christmas and that was a week ago
you know Stephanie talked about big
businesses and how they have that
cushion to keep things going through
this time period small businesses a lot
of people are concerned about that
especially the mom-and-pop type
businesses how can people help keep
their local small businesses thriving or
at least alive through this well yeah
it's a very tough situation we're
hearing from a lot of small businesses
that they are just ceasing operations
but the good news is if you are say a
coffee shop or a small restaurant what
you can do as a customer is you can go
and order online or order by phone pick
up in person or have it
patronize those institutions and those
businesses because that's really where
you know the margins are so thin when it
comes to the restaurant industry
surviving month-to-month can be
difficult and then you throw on top of
that the corona virus pandemic and it
just becomes impossible but we do know
that some of the retailers the bigger
names they're trying to set an example
by shutting down and also paying their
workers that's not as easy for a small
business it's very difficult to do that
so there have been some federal measures
proposed to provide some support you
also have companies like Facebook that
are stepping in trying to provide small
business grants to make sure that there
is some money that can sustain some of
these small businesses that maybe sell
on Facebook marketplace but in the case
of Amazon as they stopped taking new
products from third-party sellers that
is going to result and we've heard
reports of this we've heard from some of
the third-party sellers that they're
worried about are they gonna have to lay
off workers and Joe do you think there's
gonna be a lot of these small businesses
that are simply going to end up going
out of business especially this thing
goes on you know sometimes we're saying
45 days sometimes they're saying July or
August yes I do we've been talking with
a lot of Chinese restaurants that were
originally affected when coronavirus
took hold in China first before the
first cases were declared here in the US
and in California and what they've
started to realize is some of them are
closing permanently because business was
already getting a little bit slower
maybe they were a larger restaurant with
a larger staff and so we do see some of
the restaurant economics if you will
playing out here and we will see that on
the retail side you've got big companies
like Macy's and Bloomingdale's closing
their doors temporarily those are
retailers that are already struggling
it's very difficult to pay rent when it
comes to this retail apocalypse we've
been covering forever so you may see
some acceleration I guess when it comes
to some of these retailers struggling or
closing up permanently and that also
goes for restaurants and a lot of your
small businesses it's a very very
difficult time and Joe we always talk
about blunting the curve when it comes
to the cases of Crona buyer sounds like
it's the same thing we need to do when
it comes to these small businesses but
Jolene can't thank you very much for
helping us sort all this out and while a
majority of people who catch groan of
we'll have mild symptoms or no symptoms
at all one group in particular is at
risk and that's adults over 60 years old
joining us now is dr. Shawn Morrison
he's the chair Rick Dale Department of
geriatrics and Pat I'm sorry Jerry
attrex in palliative medicine and Mount
Sinai in New York City dr. Morrison
wonderful seeing you there I know you're
supposed to be here but we're practicing
our own social distancing so you're not
here you're far away which is great but
what are you seeing in your practice
when it comes to geriatrics and how this
is affecting them well what we're seeing
is very similar to what everybody who
sees that people are worried we have not
seen a large influx of older adults
coming in with respiratory symptoms yet
well we are doing in our practice though
is preparing for that and preparing for
any tree ways first is we're contacting
all of our older adults and what even
know that if they have a routine
appointment if it's just a regular
checkup that they should stay home until
we're through this for those who we can
do telephone visits or video visits
we're doing those and we are only asking
people to come in if they have ongoing
medical conditions that actually needs
to be seen in the office
and managed we are asking people that if
they develop respiratory symptoms to
call us first on before they come in and
if they're you don't have shortness of
breath if they don't have high fever if
they don't have weakness to stay home
and self isolate themselves what are you
seeing as far as the elderly the older
people the Cova 19 and how it presents
differently in them are you seeing any
differences we don't know yet
unfortunately what we do know is that
for some reason older adults seem to be
at high risk or severe over 19 that that
risk seems to increase after the age of
60 and that continues up well into the
70s and 80s but whether the disease is
presented differently in the elmia we
just don't know for me that other
diseases or similar infections what we
do see is the elderly are less likely
often to mount a high fever but can we
say that at home at night routine yet we
just don't know
and one of the big questions I get from
a lot of people because they have aging
parents who might live you the further
away from them are not necessarily with
them what can they do to help them out
right now they can do really three
things but first is to make sure they're
okay and they're following the
guidelines that everybody should be
following which are obviously wash your
hands don't touch your face and
disinfect everything but particularly
for older adults on who have adult
children there are additional three
things they should be doing
one is they should have a month supply
of food other essentials and medications
so it's in the house and not only of
your home many people have a home care
worker or somebody who comes in
regularly to help get through the day do
some like cleaning prepare meals there
should be a back-up plan if that
homecare worker can't come them or is
unable to come in or Zil to fill
themselves and finally importantly there
should be a plan in place as to what
happens if one of my parents get so how
do I care for my parent and how do I
ensure that my other parent doesn't get
ill as well that can be extremely
helpful in preparing for the hopefully
hopefully unlikely event hopefully that
they for the possibility that people
develop the sauce and dr. Morrison I
don't know if you're seeing this in your
clinic with your patients or at least
their families but I'm getting this from
a lot of people that I work with and
then I just have met and know and
they're saying one of things with their
parents is they can be stubborn and
they're not necessarily listen to the
advice about you know don't go out in
public watch out for that social
distancing they're still going to Bridge
Club they're still going to get their
nails done what do you tell people your
patients when they come in and they say
I'm still doing the things I normally do
I'm not gonna change anything you know
I'm not sure that's confined to older
adults I think we're seeing that with
everybody that means said I think there
are really two reasons to socially
distant and follow all these guidelines
now the first is that older adults are
at higher risk and we know that and we
don't yet you know which group of older
adults is at the highest rate
I would love to be able to tell my
healthy eight-year-old who has no other
medical conditions but there are pretty
well risk in it much less risk for say a
70 year old who has underlying medical
conditions we just don't know that what
we know is that age is a major risk
factor the second reason that people
need to practice the public health
guidelines that the CDC has put it is
that we are at a very important point in
preventing the spread of Koated 19 if we
all act in a responsible manner if we
take the actions that the CDC is
recommending we have a very good chance
of a birdie the worst-case scenario is
that for example we've seen in Italy and
that goes for everybody for older adults
and younger adults but if we stop the
direct spread the spread of over 19 then
we will emerge from this probably sooner
and with much fewer of complications dr.
Shawn Morrison you're on the front lines
of this crisis I want to thank you for
taking time to talk to with us and
getting us a little more clear on
especially our parents as they're
getting up there in age and what things
we can do to try and help them out so
thank you very much I appreciate it my
pleasure thank you you bet
and several counties in the Bay Area
have issued a shelter-in-place order
this week to slow the spread of corona
virus when we come back NBC's Jake warns
us to talk about his family's experience
with social distancing
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the light
shot left
good afternoon from this news meet for
your streaming world
NBC News now if it's digging in on the
issues let's talk about money in
politics if it's asking the questions
you want asked how do you reassure those
supporters that you will sustain this
just watch me if it's navigating the
winding road to the White House and if
it's Sunday it's Meet the Press
I need your true crime fix on the go but
Dateline episodes are available as
podcasts mysteries with a twist from the
true crime original Wow listen to
Dateline wherever you get your podcasts
[Music]
you're watching NBC News now we've got
some breaking news this is the Lions got
laughing brought more to the caucuses
news meet for your streaming world live
weekdays 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern
[Music]
NBC Nightly News with Lester Holt
covering coronavirus with facts over
fear how do we know who belongs in
isolation what should we be conscious
that's being worked on today at a time
of national crisis turned to the most
trusted TV news anchor in America
[Music]
our very own Jake Ward is sheltering in
place as part of a mandate for nine
counties in the San Francisco Bay Area
he gave us a look at what his first 24
hours have been like I just drove in
from Oakland to downtown San Francisco
where there was plenty of parking ahead
of a midnight shelter-in-place order
that goes into effect tonight I'm headed
into my office to grab the last few
things I'll need for three weeks
I'll try to report the news from home
our Bureau has gone dark nobody is
coming in for interviews no guests we're
not doing any of the normal business of
reporting the news from here the whole
place is shut down I think what I need
for three weeks let's try to do this job
on my own I got to a certain point being
in here where it's this bill it felt
nervous being in here this long so I
decided to put on like 95 ask and that's
it I've got all my stuff camera
microphone lights to try to do the job
from home for three weeks starting now
[Music]
here in the Bay Area we are preparing to
be basically at home under this order
which lasts until April 7th and that
means no non-essential travel unless we
are actively sick in some sort of
emergency or have run out of food and
must make a run to a grocery store we
otherwise have to stay at home essential
services will remain open grocery stores
pharmacies but everything else
essentially bars restaurants gyms all of
that is closed and that means we're all
getting get used to life at home we've
been preparing here to be busy the
educators of our own children so we've
gone up with this little schedule
8 to 9 a.m.
9:00 to 10:00 a.m. writing and literacy
and reading a snack a playtime movement
a meditation time which we are all going
to need all of this is you know us just
kind of winging it none of us are
trained in my community you know to do
this kind of thing we don't know how to
stay home the incredible pressure that
we're all gonna feel to remain in our
houses try to make some sort of
meaningful life for our children while
we're here and most fundamentally to do
whatever we can to not go out all of
that is gonna be a tremendous challenge
for people in this community right now
it's kind of cute my kids have a nice
little routine going my wife is doing
conference calls but you cut to week
three and you know who know who's how
we're all gonna be feeling about one
another much less what we're gonna be
eating
[Music]
No
like seven billion other people in the
Bay Area we were trying to figure out
what are we gonna do with our time and
originally I had said we don't need to
worry about you know no big deal we can
just wing it well no my wife argued we
need some sort of structure and that has
been the lesson of day one maintaining a
school like schedule negotiating with
each other about who's on and who's off
and having those conversations clearly
with everyone in the family that might
get us today 21 this is our new reality
we're trying to home-school our kids my
wife is somehow I'm doing that while
working her full-time job we're trying
to figure out you know do we have enough
food on hand and the real question is I
mean this is day one what is life gonna
be like here 21 days in
[Music]
and jake joins us now from his home in
oakland california Jake thanks for
letting us in and your house there and a
little idea of what's going on
you know yesterday New York City Mayor
Bill DeBlasio said in a press conference
that shelter in place could go in effect
as soon as tomorrow here in New York
City 48 hours notice how do you prepare
for that you know for me you know we
really had no idea I mean here in the
California Bay Area we have some sense
of emergency preparation right in my
backyard I have a chest that has
emergency equipment for things like
fires and earthquakes you know the
things that we get here but this idea
that we were supposed to lay in supplies
for several weeks at home is a whole new
thing I will say when I compare how our
experience has been to what I have read
about life in Wuhan right where where
security guards were posted at the
entrances to people's homes keeping them
from leaving or entering where your
phone was tracking you everywhere you
went and telling you whether or not you
were quarantined you know life is pretty
loose here as compared to that but
certainly there is this order right the
most strict in the country here in the
Bay Area that says you can't go out
except for essential activities of
course here in California we consider an
essential activity to include exercising
outdoors we're allowed to do that but
we're not allowed to do it in groups and
doing so they say on the order is
illegal and so I think we're we're
wavering on the edge here of a real need
to lock it down right that is certainly
what you know you know we need to stop
sort of exchanging air and exchanging
you know any sort of close contact
because that is the danger here so the
question is you know this feels pretty
tight to me but you know is it too
porous is it gonna let too much through
in the end that's the big question for
and time will tell but you described
Wuhan which is more of a lockdown
situation you're in a shelter in a place
situation what's still open there yeah
here you know we have essential services
and that counts
you know there's a lot of things that
fall under that rubric it turns out so
grocery stores pharmacies they are still
open they're observing
some strictures around how many people
are allowed in at a time so I just
tooled around yesterday and saw that our
grocery store had a line of several
hundred people out into the parking lot
because they're only letting in about
ten people at a time right so that stuff
has changed but it is still open
hospitals are open police departments
are still open all these essential
services but then you get into a sort of
squishier category when it comes to
things like rideshares
you are allowed to use uber and lyft
right a ride to your service if you're
going somewhere essential but that puts
those drivers in an impossible situation
right things like you know going out for
medical supplies definitely still
allowed to do that in pharmacies of
course open you know those things are
all there
but gyms restaurants all of that done
it's not gotten so far as to actually
shut down private vehicle traffic the
way they did in China but certainly the
streets are very quiet it's quite spooky
walking around you know my street which
has cars typically going up and down
didn't move much at all in fact when
grocery sorry when garbage trucks went
by yesterday I I found myself deeply
relieved by that to know that sort of
the systems are still moving there's a
real eerie kind of frozen in time
quality to being here right now it's
definitely a new normal if you're happy
to see the garbage truck but grocery
stores you mentioned they're still open
is there anything to buy their shelves
empty like they are in a lot of places
you know it seemed that the sort of the
panic buying and I gotta say I was I was
you know I did this too I immediately
found myself fixated on the idea that I
needed a chest freezer right one of
those garage top-loading freezers
because I thought you know I have to lay
in a lot of foods I may get one yeah
they're sold out across the Bay Area but
then you look at and you realize no
actually the supply of food is pretty
solid we really do have a good supply of
food I mean we live in California it's
the breadbasket of America you know I
think we're gonna be ok on the food
front so the supplies seem ok it's for
me this larger question of can we you
know right now I think of the first few
days everyone's are taking it pretty
seriously but I wonder you know after a
couple of days maybe a week two weeks
are people gonna start to break out of
it you know we saw that I was just
reading a history of the 1918 flu
epidemic that was specific to Oakland to
history specific to Oakland and there
was enormous uproar about the
inconvenience of it because for more
than a month you had to wear a mask
to do all of these things and so I
wonder are we going to continue to be
able to do this without the sort of
strictures that China put on its
citizens I certainly hope so and
certainly you know I think we're trying
to take it in the spirit of we're very
lucky we have a house right we have a
yard we get along pretty well we've got
good food all of those things I think
are gonna make it possible for us to to
do this in the long term but certainly
there's this psychological challenge and
for us I mean as you saw there the thing
for us we're learning is structure not
just the structure of the day the
scheduling of the day but also how you
use the space so I had my camera set up
with lights and everything in the living
room oh you know we got into such an
argument about it because that's got to
be sacred space when you're all gonna be
stuck in a little place so now I'm in
the basement this is the basement if I
spun the camera around you'd see my
laundry machine you know you have to do
that kind of thing I think to get us to
make us get along in these kinds of
confined spaces for this amount of time
and Jake I want to thank you for giving
us some insight into what could become
reality for the rest of us and giving us
a time to show what exactly is going on
in your house during your
shelter-in-place so thank you very much
Jake how this is going to work in New
York I have no idea really I really
think we'll find out here soon
but you know even if you do everything
right during a quarantine 14 days or
longer you might end up getting cabin
fever psychotherapist Shari Botwin is
here to talk to us about how to stay
sane during that time period Shari thank
you for being with us give us some tips
on how you can do it give us some tips
on how you can deal with cabin fever the
best thing to do is just to first of all
know this will end and in terms of the
cabin fever
give yourself breaks get out of your
house sit on your front step take your
yoga mat outside and do some yoga go
into a quiet room and listen to a book
anything to know that you're not just
literally stuck in your house so getting
that fresh air getting out about getting
some sunshine that can be really helpful
to getting that cabin fever under
control yeah definitely and even just
remembering there's a whole world out
there to really try to connect with the
environment and our beautiful universe
and know that we really won't
through this we are not going to be
stuck in our homes forever and for
parents who have school-aged children
they're not their kids teacher but now
that are being asked to administer work
that's sent home by the schools how can
they get their kids to do that it might
not be an easy battle you know what the
one thing I'm reminding myself is that I
can't go from being my little guys
parents who's a teacher so I say to
myself what can I do to support him in
doing his work without trying to be his
teacher so one of the one of the
thoughts that I had was get one of the
students from the class on the phone do
a post do a FaceTime study group I know
tomorrow I'm planning a 10 o'clock
online school with one of my little guys
best friends and they're excited about
it we need to make it fun and we need to
know it's not gonna be perfect and we're
gonna do the best we can but really what
matters the most is that we stay safe
and that we stay we stay happy we can't
let this put us under the edge or over
the edge I should say I agree with you
but a different issue might be if you're
living with someone who has OCD or
anxiety already how can you make it a
little easier for them because I can
only imagine that anxiety and OCD is
gonna be exacerbated here in this time
period I mean I've been talking to
patients all week struggling with all
these different kinds of issues and if
you if you live with someone who's who's
in recovery from depression or struggles
with anxiety and they're thinking how am
I gonna get to my therapists office or
how am I gonna get my medication again
we can't be our partners therapists but
we can be a support system we can check
in with them how's it going are you
talking to your therapist I know most
therapists are still conducting sessions
via telemedicine so they can still be in
treatment and I think just to reassure
them it is a really hard time and if you
are struggling more it is okay I'm not
gonna judge you I'm here for you and I
also think as a family member if you're
really worried about your loved one if
you're thinking he or she is really not
doing well reach out to the person
psychiatrist call the therapists tell
them say I'm really worried about my
husband or wife what do I do
just try and help out as much
and keep those social connections going
as well as you can how about dating real
quickly we don't much time but what can
you do for dating so I was talking to
somebody yesterday who whose boyfriend
is far away and I said have you decided
have you thought about scheduling a
FaceTime date
why don't you schedule a FaceTime dinner
date tomorrow at 6 o'clock you and I
we're gonna have a FaceTime dinner date
and do the best you can talk about
things that really matter
remind each other how much you love each
other what you feel about each other and
try to have some fun with it put on
romantic music excellent well thank you
very much you've given us some fantastic
ideas and what we can do
absolutely Lloyd that cabin fever and to
help our kids out and help ourselves out
too so I appreciate it thank you very
much good now that does it for us right
now and remember our coronavirus crisis
team is closely tracking a story is
providing updates across all NBC News
platforms and of course the latest
information is always available at
nbcnews.com slash coronavirus remember
we will get through this we're trying to
blunt that curb both in the numbers of
cases but also in our fiscal health our
financial health our mental health and
our emotional health so do the things
you can to try and keep yourself and
everybody around you healthy and as much
as you can be happy and healthy and
thank you for all for joining us this
hour
NBC News now